<?xml version='1.0'?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN"
"http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.2/docbookx.dtd" [
<!ENTITY qbrew          '<application>QBrew</application>'>
<!ENTITY qbrew.version  "0.4.1">
<!ENTITY qt.version     "4.3 or greater">
]>

<book id="handbook">
  <bookinfo>
    <title>The QBrew Handbook</title>

    <author>
      <firstname>David</firstname><surname>Johnson</surname>
      <affiliation>
        <address><email>david@usermode.org</email></address>
      </affiliation>
    </author>

    <copyright>
      <year>1999 - 2008</year>
      <holder role="david@usermode.org">David Johnson</holder>
    </copyright>

    <legalnotice>
      <para>Permission to use, copy, modify and distribute this
      document for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted in
      perpetuity, provided that the  above copyright notice and this
      paragraph appear in all copies.</para>
    </legalnotice>
  </bookinfo>

  <preface id="intro"> <title>Introduction</title>
    <para>&qbrew; is a homebrewer's recipe calculator. With it a
    brewer can formulate new recipes and calculate gravity,
    bitterness, color and other attributes.</para>

    <para>No payment or registration is required for &qbrew;, but the
    author would be extremely delighted to receive spontaneous and
    voluntarily donated bottles filled with homebrew. Photos of such
    bottles will do in a pinch. If you wish to contribute to the
    further inebriation of the author, please send mail to
    <email>david@usermode.org</email> requesting a physical address to
    send the bottles to.</para>

    <para>The homepage for QBrew is
    <ulink url="http://www.usermode.org/code.html">http://www.usermode.org/code.html</ulink></para>

    <para>Code and cash contributions will, of course, grease the
    wheels of QBrew development.</para>
  </preface>

  <chapter id="using">
    <title>Using &qbrew;</title>

    <section id="recipes">
      <title>Recipes</title>

      <section id="details">
        <title>Basic Recipe Details</title>

        <para>Enter in the basic recipe details in the top section of
        the program window. There are fields for the title of the
        recipe, the name of the brewer, recipe style, and batch size.</para>

        <para>The name of the recipe and the brewer are for
        identification purposes only. The recipe style will display the
        appropriate style parameters in the characteristics area. The
        batch size affects many calculations.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="ingredients">
        <title>Recipe Ingredients</title>

        <para>Recipe ingredients are added using the bottom section of
        the program window. There are tabs for grains and other
        fermentables, hops, and miscellaneous ingredients.</para>

        <para>You can edit any field of an ingredient by double
        clicking within it. To enter a new ingredient, double click in
        the name field of a blank row. To remove an ingredient, set
        its name field to a blank.</para>

        <para>The <guilabel>Notes</guilabel> tab of this section allows
        you to enter notes on the recipe and batches. These could be
        specific brewing procedures, brewing and bottling dates, or
        measured gravity. They are saved along with the recipe, but
        otherwise do not affect it.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="characteristics">
        <title>Recipe Characteristics</title>

        <para>The middle section of the program window details your
        recipe's characteristics. Information included here are the
        recommended gravity, bitterness and color for the selected
        recipe style, as well as the calculated gravity, bitterness,
        color and alcoholic content for your recipe.</para>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="misc">
      <title>Miscellaneous</title>

      <section id="alchohol">
        <title>Alcohol Percentage Tool</title>

        <para>You can calculate the actual alcohol percentage in a
        batch by using the <guilabel>Alcohol Percentage</guilabel>
        tool under the <guimenu>Tools</guimenu> menu. Enter in your
        measured original gravity and final gravity. The percentage of
        alchohol by volume and by weight will be calculated.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="hydrometer">
        <title>Hydrometer Correction Tool</title>

        <para>You can access the <guilabel>Hydrometer
        Correction</guilabel> tool under the <guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
        menu. This tool is useful for converting your actual
        hydrometer readings to the correct value. Enter in the
        temperature at which you took the sample, the temperature at
        which the hydrometer is calibrated (typically 60&deg; or
        68&deg; Fahrenheit), and the actual hydrometer reading. The
        corrected reading will be calculated.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="qbrewdata">
        <title>QBrew Data</title>

        <para>The data that &qbrew; uses is in the file
        <filename>qbrewdata</filename>, typically located under
        the install directory in Windows, as part of the application
        bundle under Macintosh OSX, and under
        <filename>/usr/local/share/qbrew</filename> under traditional
        Unix. If there exists a file in the user's home directory with
        the name of <filename>.qbrewdata</filename>, then this file
        will be used instead.</para>

        <para>The Database Editor, under the <guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
        menu, may be used to edit the users's <filename>.qbrewdata</filename>
        file. The operation of the editor is similar to editing
        ingredients in a recipe. In addition there is a
        <guimenu>Style</guimenu> page for editing recipe styles.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="conversions">
        <title>US/Metric Conversions</title>

        <para>US units of measurement are used by default in
        &qbrew;. This can be changed in the configuration dialog. Both
        US and Metric measurements are available.</para>

        <para>Please note that converting from one system to another
        and back may result in round-off errors during the
        conversion.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="exporting">
        <title>Exporting and Importing Data</title>

        <para>QBrew will import BeerXML recipes, and export native
        recipes to HTML, PDF, BeerXML or plain text format. BeerXML is a
        new format designed for sharing recipes and other brewing
        data. QBrew supports version 1.0.</para>

        <para>Importing or exporting a recipe will result in some loss
        of data. This is because  brewing programs all have different
        underlying assumptions and models for the data. Because of
        this, QBrew recipes should be stored in the native QBrew
        format, and only exported for sharing or posting
        recipes.</para>

      </section>
    </section>
  </chapter>

  <chapter id="reference">
    <title>&qbrew; Reference</title>

    <section id="menus">
      <title>The Menus</title>

      <section id="file">
        <title>The File Menu</title>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->New <emphasis>(Ctrl+N)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>This creates a new empty recipe. If there is a
              current recipe with unsaved changes the user is given a
              chance to save it.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Open <emphasis>(Ctrl+O)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>This opens an existing recipe. Use the Open dialog
              to select the recipe you wish to open.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Open Recent</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>This is a shortcut to open recently saved
              recipes. This item opens a list with several of the most
              recently saved recipes to choose from.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Save <emphasis>(Ctrl+S)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Saves the current recipe. If this is the first
              time the recipe has been saved, the <guilabel>Save
              As</guilabel> dialog (described next) will be shown.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Save As...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Saves the recipe under a new file name. A <guilabel>Save
              As</guilabel> dialog will be shown to select the name of
              the file to save to.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Export...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Exports the recipe to a different format. This
              command will display the <guilabel>Export</guilabel>
              dialog, which is very similar to the <guilabel>Save
              As</guilabel> dialog.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Print Preview...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Display a print preview dialog. This dialog can be used
              to preview the recipe before printing.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Print... <emphasis>(Ctrl+P)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>This prints the recipe. Opens a print dialog
              allowing the user to specify where and how to print.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>File->Quit<emphasis>(Ctrl+Q)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Quits &qbrew;. If you have unsaved recipes, you
              will be prompted to save them.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </section>

      <section id="tools">
        <title>The Tools Menu</title>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Tools->Alcohol Percentage...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Brings up the Alchohol Percentage tool. This is
              used to calculate alcohol percentage by weight or
              volume, from measured specific gravity readins.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Tools->Hydrometer Correction...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Brings up the Hydrometer Correction tool. This is
              used to correct hydrometer readings taken at
              temperatures other than the calibrated temperature.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Tools->Database Editor...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Brings up the Database Editor tool. This is used
              to edit the database of ingredients and styles.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </section>

      <section id="options">
        <title>The Options Menu</title>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Options->Main Toolbar</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Toggle the main toolbar on and off. When unchecked the
              toolbar is hidden.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Options->Statusbar</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Toggle the status bar on and off. When unchecked
              the status bar is hidden.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Options->Configure...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>This configures settings for &qbrew;. A dialog is
              shown to configure general, recipe and calculation
              related settings.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </section>

      <section id="help">
        <title>The Help Menu</title>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Help->Contents <emphasis>(F1)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Opens up a help window and displays this document.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Help->Primer</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Opens up a help window and displays a brewing primer.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Help->What's This? <emphasis>(Shift-F1)</emphasis></command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Brings up a cursor you can use to find out what
              various controls and objects in the application
              do. Clicking on an item within &qbrew; will pop up a small
              window with help on that item.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>Help->About...</command></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Displays copyright and other basic information
              about &qbrew;</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="configuration">
      <title>Configuration</title>

      <para>The <guilabel>Configuration</guilabel> dialog is used
      configuring &qbrew;. There are four buttons on the bottom of the
      dialog. Pressing the <guilabel>OK</guilabel> button will apply
      all settings and close the dialog. Pressing the
      <guilabel>Reset</guilabel> button will reset the dialog to
      default values. Pressing the <guilabel>Apply</guilabel> button
      will apply the settings, but not close the dialog. The
      <guilabel>Cancel</guilabel> button will close the dialog without
      applying the settings.</para>

      <para>Configuration changes are automatically saved when the
      <guilabel>OK</guilabel> button is pressed.</para>

      <section id="generalconfig">
        <title>General Configuration</title>

        <para>The <guilabel>"Look and feel"</guilabel> control allows
        you to change the look and feel (theme) of
        &qbrew;. <guilabel>"Show splash screen"</guilabel> lets you
        choose to display or not display the program startup splash
        screen.</para>

        <para>The <guilabel>"Recent files"</guilabel> control selects
        the number of files displayed in the <guilabel>"Open
        Recent"</guilabel> menu. The <guilabel>"Enable
        autosave"</guilabel> controls set whether automatic saving of
        the current recipe is done, and how often. The
        <guilabel>"Enable autobackup"</guilabel> control sets whether
        recipes are automatically backed up. The <guilabel>"Load last
        file"</guilabel> control determines whether the previously used
        recipe is automatically loaded upon program startup.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="recipeconfig">
        <title>Recipe Configuration</title>

        <para>The <guilabel>"Recipe Defaults"</guilabel> section sets
        some default recipe values. These settings only affect new
        recipes or ingredients. They include <guilabel>"Batch
        size"</guilabel>, <guilabel>"Recipe style"</guilabel>, and
        <guilabel>"Hop type"</guilabel>.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="calculationconfig">
        <title>Calculation Configuration</title>

        <para>Use the <guilabel>"Measurement units"</guilabel> control
        to set the measurement units you will be using (US or
        Metric). Use the <guilabel>"Tinseth"</guilabel> and
        <guilabel>"Morey"</guilabel> controls to alter the bitterness
        and color calculations. <guilabel>"Efficiency"</guilabel> sets
        the mash efficiency for calculations.</para>
      </section>
    </section>
  </chapter>

  <chapter id="notes">
    <title>Designer's Notes</title>

      <para>&qbrew; aims to be a simple streamlined homebrewing recipe
      calculator. As such, it doesn't include features that other
      software designed for professional brewing might include. This
      is not a flaw on the part of &qbrew;, but a conscious choice to
      moderate the scope of the software. Emails and forum posts
      praising the &qbrew; interface tell me that his was a good
      decision.</para>

    <section id="grain">
      <title>Grain Calculations</title>

      <para>The basic gravity calculation is the sum of all grains'
      extract times quantity, divided by the batch size. Mashed grains
      will have their extract modified by the mash efficiency. Steeped
      grains will use a lesser efficiency, typically half of their
      extract.</para>

      <para>The color calculated is in <abbrev>SRM</abbrev>, not in
      <abbrev>HCU</abbrev> (homebrew color
      units). <abbrev>HCU</abbrev> is the sum of all grains' color
      times quantity, divided by the batch size. This is only accurate
      for very low color values. The default conversion to SRM uses
      the formula discovered by Ray Daniels, which is
      <emphasis>SRM=(MCUx0.2)+8.4</emphasis> (for values of HCU over
      8.0). An alternate color calculation discovered by Dan Morey is
      <emphasis>SRM=1.4922x[(MCU)^0.6859]</emphasis> (for values of
      SRM less than 50). To change to the Morey method, open up the
      <command>Configure...</command> dialog and check the
      <command>Use Morey color calculation</command> box. More
      information on color calculations can be found at "Approximating
      SRM Beer Color" &lt;http://hbd.org/babble/Color.htm&gt;, and
      "Beer's Law"
      &lt;http://www.brewingtechniques.com/brewingtechniques/beerslaw/morey.html&gt;.</para>

      <para>Final gravity is assumed to be 25% of the
      <abbrev>OG</abbrev>. Looking through the <abbrev>AHB</abbrev>
      style guide, this is the same assumption they made. The
      alcoholic content calculations were derived from Noonan's
      <citetitle>New Brewing Lager Beer</citetitle>, and based
      on this <abbrev>FG</abbrev> assumption.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="hop">
      <title>Hop Calculations</title>

      <para>There are two different methods used to calculate hop
      bitterness. The default <abbrev>IBU</abbrev> calculation uses
      the Rager method, from Norm Pyle's "Hops FAQ"
      &lt;http://realbeer.com/hops/FAQ.html&gt;. The other method is
      the Tinseth method, from Glen Tinseth's "Hop Page"
      &lt;http://realbeer.com/hops/&gt;. To change to the Tinseth
      method, open up the <command>Configure...</command> dialog
      and check the
      <command>Use Tinseth bitterness calculation</command> box. The
      utilization table for the Rager method can be edited by changing
      the appropriate area of the <filename>qbrewdata</filename>
      file.</para>

      <para>Please see the above links for details on these formulae,
      as they can be a bit complex.</para>
    </section>
  </chapter>

  <chapter id="faq">
    <title>Questions and Answers</title>

    <qandaset defaultlabel="qanda">
      <qandaentry>
        <question>
          <para>Why don't the results on the <guilabel>Alcohol
          tool</guilabel> match the
          <guilabel>Characteristics</guilabel> section of the main
          window?</para>
        </question>
        <answer>
          <para>It's the curse of rounding errors! When you use the
          <guilabel>Alcohol tool</guilabel> you are entering in
          gravity values with a precision of two decimal places. But
          your recipe in QBrew is stored with a much higher precision
          than this, even though it is displaying characteristics with
          a lower precision.</para>
        </answer>
      </qandaentry>
      <qandaentry>
        <question>
          <para>I get hundreds of errors when I try to compile
          &qbrew; under Unix. What am I doing wrong?</para>
        </question>
        <answer>
          <para>&qbrew; has been successfully compiled and run on a
          variety of Unix platforms, so the odds are low that
          something's wrong with configure (although it does
          happen). More likely, you don't have the necessary libraries
          or headers installed. Make sure that you have the X
          development libraries installed, as well as the Qt
          &qt.version; or greater development libraries. &qbrew; will
          not compile and link with the older Qt 3.x
          libraries.</para>

          <para>There are many useful options in the configure
          script. These options can be displayed by running
          <command>./configure --help</command>. Also please read the
          INSTALL file for several useful tips.</para>

          <para>If you are still having problems after this, then
          write me at <email>qbrew@usermode.org</email>. Please
          include the full text of the error message, along with the
          <filename>config.log</filename> in the build directory.</para> 
        </answer>
      </qandaentry>
      <qandaentry>
        <question>
          <para>Why don't you distribute &qbrew; as a DEB or RPM file?</para>
        </question>
        <answer>
          <para>I do make packages available for Windows and Mac
          OSX. I am doing this because users of those platforms are
          unaccustomed to building software. It is more difficult to
          do this under Linux and Unix because there are so too many
          different varieties available. I cannot possibly distribute
          binary packages for each system and distribution while trying
          to keep up with changing versions.</para>

          <para>At this time, &qbrew; is already available prepackaged
          for Debian GNU/Linux, SuSE Linux, Linspire, NetBSD and
          FreeBSD. If you distribution does not have a &qbrew;
          package, you may wish to consider maintaining one for
          them. Please note that the available binary packages are not
          always the most recent &qbrew; version.</para>
        </answer>
      </qandaentry>
    </qandaset>
  </chapter>

  <appendix id="credits">
    <title>Credits</title>

    <section id="thanks">
      <title>Helpful Folk</title>

      <para>I would like the thank the following people for their
      outstanding help with the creation of &qbrew;...</para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>...Abe Kabakoff for contributing several formulae and
          the Correction tool.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>...Michal Palczewski for contributing bug fixes and
          the Alcohol tool.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>...Lee Henderson,  Rob Hudson, and Kevin Pullin for
          contributing bug fixes.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>...Tobias Quathamer for German translation work.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>...Stephen Lowrie for a lot of rote work with
          the <filename>qbrewdata</filename> file, as well as major
          portions of the brewing primer.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>...the various maintainers for &qbrew; packages.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>...The numerous users who have written me and kept my
          spirits up.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </section>

    <section id="copyright">
      <title>Copyright</title>

      <para>Copyright &copy; 1999 - 2008 David Johnson, All Rights
      Reserved.</para>

      <para>Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
      without modification, are permitted provided that the following
      conditions are met:</para>

      <para>1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above
      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
      disclaimer.</para>

      <para>2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
      disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
      with the distribution.</para>

      <para>THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND
      CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS''  AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
      INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
      MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
      DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR
      CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
      SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
      LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
      USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
      AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
      LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
      IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
      THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.</para>

      <para>This product contains software written by Abe Kabakoff
      &lt;abe_kabakoff@gmx.de&gt;, and Michal Palczewski
      &lt;michalp@gmail.com&gt;</para>
    </section>
  </appendix>
</book>
